doc: update signature specification for v1 release (#256)
notaryproject/notaryproject: specs/signature-specification.md

# Signature Specification

> This document provides the following details for Notary signatures:

Reviewer: I would change to:
> This document provides the following details about Notary Project signatures.

- **[Storage](#storage)**: Describes how signatures are stored and retrieved from an OCI registry.

> - **[Signature Envelope](#signature-envelope)**: Describes the structure of a Notary signature.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signature_

## Storage

> This section describes how Notary signatures are stored in the OCI Distribution conformant registry.

Reviewer: Change to _Notary Project signatures_

> This section describes how the Notary signature are stored in the OCI Distribution conformant registry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section describes how a Notary signature is stored in an OCI Distribution conformant registry.
```

> OCI image manifest is used to store signatures in the registry, see [OCI image spec v1.0.0][oci-image-manifest] for details.

Reviewer 3: It is not `v1.0.0` since `subject` does not exist in `v1.0.0` but exists in `v1.1.0`.

> OCI image manifest is used to store signatures in the registry, see [OCI image spec v1.1.0-rc3][oci-image-manifest] for details.

Reviewer 3: Need to create an issue for `v1.1.0-rc4` update.

Author: Done. See https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/issues/270

> OCI image manifest is used to store signatures in the registry, see [OCI image spec v1.1.0-rc.2][oci-image-manifest] for details.

Reviewer 4: Why should we refer to the OCI 1.1.0-rc2 image spec here. Can't we refer to the OCI 1.0 image spec here?

Author: Yes, we can use OCI 1.0 image spec. but the difference is that notary signature uses additional optional field named `subject` for referring to signed artifacts, which is described in OCI 1.1. I will see whether I can add a note somewhere.

> The signature manifest has an media type of config that specifies it's a Notary signature, a subject referencing the manifest of the artifact being signed, a layer referencing the signature, and a collection of annotations.

Reviewer: Change to _Notary Project signature_

> The signature manifest has an media type of config that specifies it's a Notary Project signature, a subject referencing the manifest of the artifact being signed, a layer referencing the signature, and a collection of annotations.

Reviewer: Can we reword to make it a bit more readable? For example:
> The signature manifest has a configuration media type that specifies it's a Notary Project signature

> ![Signature storage inside registry](../media/signature-specification.svg)

Reviewer: We should update the image with _Notary Project signature_

Besides the [image manifest property requirements][image-manifest-property-descriptions], the properties have the following additional restrictions:

- **`mediaType`** (*string*): This REQUIRED property MUST be `application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json`.

> - **`config`** (*descriptor*): This property is REQUIRED to be compatible with [OCI image specification][oci-image-manifest]. The Notary Project signature specification doesn't require any configuration for a signature, and the configuration content is not consumed by implementations of the Notary Project signature specification.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **`config`** (*descriptor*): This property is REQUIRED to be compatible with [OCI image specification][oci-image-manifest]. The Notary Project signature specification doesn't require any configuration for a signature, and the configuration content is not meant to be consumed by implementations of the Notary Project signature specification.
```

Author: @priteshbandi Sorry. Not sure how this comment was missed. Is it OK to update it post specifications v1 release, since it is a small wording issue?

Reviewer 5: Yeah, we can do this after v1.

  - **`mediaType`** (*string*): This REQUIRED property MUST be `application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature`.
  - **`digest`** (*string*): This REQUIRED property is the digest of the config content.
  - **`size`** (*int64*): This REQUIRED property specifies the size, in bytes, of the raw config content.
- **`layers`** (*array of objects*): This REQUIRED property contains collection of only one [OCI descriptor][oci-descriptor] referencing the signature envelope.
  - **`mediaType`** (*string*): This REQUIRED property contains media type of signature envelope blob. Following values are supported
    - `application/jose+json`
    - `application/cose`

> - **`subject`** (*descriptor*): A REQUIRED artifact descriptor referencing the signed manifest.

Reviewer 5: Can we add example of manifests ?

Author: @priteshbandi  the example of manifest was shown above as `Signature manifest example per OCI image manifest:`

> - **`annotations`** (*string-string map*): This REQUIRED property contains metadata for the image manifest.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **`annotations`** (*string-string map*): This REQUIRED property contains metadata for the artifact manifest.
```
I believe other discussions confirmed 'artifact' to be the most appropriate term over 'image' as 'image' is more narrowly scoped in applicability than what the Notary Project signature specification may be used for.

Author: @TheFoxAtWork The context is different. The image manifest refers to https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/manifest.md, which is type of manifest that is used for storing signatures, so it is a correct term.

Reviewer 2: thanks for the clarification!

Besides the [image manifest property requirements][image-manifest-property-descriptions], the properties have the following additional restrictions:

- **`mediaType`** (*string*): This REQUIRED property MUST be `application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json`.
- **`config`** (*descriptor*): This property is REQUIRED to be compatible with [OCI image specification][oci-image-manifest]. Notary Project signature specification doesn't require any configuration for a signature, and the configuration content is not consumed by Notary Project tooling.
  - **`mediaType`** (*string*): This REQUIRED property MUST be `application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature`.
  - **`digest`** (*string*): This REQUIRED property is the digest of the config content.
  - **`size`** (*int64*): This REQUIRED property specifies the size, in bytes, of the raw config content.
- **`layers`** (*array of objects*): This REQUIRED property contains collection of only one [OCI descriptor][oci-descriptor] referencing the signature envelope.
  - **`mediaType`** (*string*): This REQUIRED property contains media type of signature envelope blob. Following values are supported
    - `application/jose+json`
    - `application/cose`

> - **`subject`** (*descriptor*): A REQUIRED artifact descriptor referencing the signed manifest, including, but not limited to image manifest, image index.

Reviewer: Do we mean _"index manifest"_ with _"image index"_? Maybe we should use _"image index manifest"_ instead.

Author: I think we can remove "but not limited to", because there is only one manifest type, which is image manifest type.

- **`annotations`** (*string-string map*): This REQUIRED property contains metadata for the image manifest.
  It is being used to store information about the signature.
  Keys using the `io.cncf.notary` namespace are reserved for use in Notary Project and MUST NOT be used by other specifications.
  - **`io.cncf.notary.x509chain.thumbprint#S256`**: A REQUIRED annotation whose value contains the list of SHA-256 fingerprint of signing certificate and certificate chain (including root) used for signature generation. The annotation name contains the hash algorithm as a suffix (`#S256`) and can be extended to support other hashing algorithms in future.

>     The list of fingerprints is present as a JSON array string, corresponding to ordered certificates in [*Certificate Chain* unsigned attribute](#unsigned-attributes) in the signature envelope.

Reviewer: How is this related to the previous sentence? Can we add more context? Reading the bullet point sounds like the annotation has the list also. Or, are we storing JSON array in the annotation?

Author: The first paragraph mentioned that its value contains the list of SHA-256 fingerprints. The 2nd sentence gave a further description about the format of this list of fingerprints. I will move the 2nd sentence close to the place where the list of fingerprints was first mentioned.

### Signature Discovery

The client should be able to discover all the signatures belonging to an artifact (such as image manifest) by using [OCI Distribution Referrers API][oci-distribution-referrers].
OCI Distribution Referrers API returns a paginated list of all artifacts belonging to a target artifact (such as container images, SBoMs).
The implementation can filter Notary Project signature artifacts by either using OCI Distribution Referrers API or using custom logic on the client.
Each Notary Project signature artifact refers to a signature envelope blob.

### Signature Filtering

An OCI artifact can have multiple signatures, Notary Project tooling uses annotations of the signature artifact to filter relevant signatures based on the applicable trust policy.

> The Notary Project signature artifact's `io.cncf.notary.x509chain.thumbprint#S256` annotations key MUST contain the list of SHA-256 fingerprints of certificate and certificate chain used for signing.

Reviewer: Is it one annotation that contains all the signatures or multiple annotations? Multiple should not be possible but plural is used in this sentence. We should fix.

Besides the [image manifest property requirements][image-manifest-property-descriptions], the properties have the following additional restrictions:

- **`mediaType`** (*string*): This REQUIRED property MUST be `application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json`.

> - **`config`** (*descriptor*): This property is REQUIRED to be compatible with [OCI image specification][oci-image-manifest]. Notary doesn't require any configuration for a signature, and the configuration content is not consumed by Notary.

Reviewer: I would change to 
> Notary Project signature specification doesn't require any configuration for a signature, and the configuration content is not consumed by Notary Project tooling.

    The list of fingerprints is present as a JSON array string, corresponding to ordered certificates in [*Certificate Chain* unsigned attribute](#unsigned-attributes) in the signature envelope.

### Signature Discovery

The client should be able to discover all the signatures belonging to an artifact (such as image manifest) by using [OCI Distribution Referrers API][oci-distribution-referrers].
OCI Distribution Referrers API returns a paginated list of all artifacts belonging to a target artifact (such as container images, SBoMs).
The implementation can filter Notary Project signature artifacts by either using OCI Distribution Referrers API or using custom logic on the client.
Each Notary Project signature artifact refers to a signature envelope blob.

### Signature Filtering

An OCI artifact can have multiple signatures, Notary Project tooling uses annotations of the signature artifact to filter relevant signatures based on the applicable trust policy.

> The Notary Project signature artifact's `io.cncf.notary.x509chain.thumbprint#S256` annotations key MUST contain the list of SHA-256 fingerprints of certificate and certificate chain used for signing.

Reviewer 4: Is it SHA-1 fingerprints or SHA-256 fingerprints for the certificates and certificate chains?

Author: It is SHA-256 fingerprints. SHA-1 is not secure.

The client should be able to discover all the signatures belonging to an artifact (such as image manifest) by using [OCI Distribution Referrers API][oci-distribution-referrers].
OCI Distribution Referrers API returns a paginated list of all artifacts belonging to a target artifact (such as container images, SBoMs).

> The implementation can filter the Notary signatures by either using OCI Distribution Referrers API or using custom logic on the client.

Reviewer: We should replace "Notary signature" to "Notary Project signature" in all references in the doc.

> Each the Notary signature refers to a signature envelope blob.

Reviewer: Notary Project signature...

### Signature Filtering

An OCI artifact can have multiple signatures, The Notary Project tooling uses annotations of the signature artifact to filter relevant signatures based on the applicable trust policy.

> The Notary signature manifest's `io.cncf.notary.x509chain.thumbprint#S256` annotation key MUST contain the list of SHA-256 fingerprints of certificate and certificate chain used for signing.

Reviewer: It seems we need to revert those changes as per the latest discussion about naming and branding

### Signature Filtering

> An OCI artifact can have multiple signatures, Notary uses annotations of the signature artifact to filter relevant signatures based on the applicable trust policy.

Reviewer: I would change to
> Notary Project tooling uses the annotations of the signature artifact...

> The Notary signature artifact's `io.cncf.notary.x509chain.thumbprint#S256` annotations key MUST contain the list of SHA-256 fingerprints of certificate and certificate chain used for signing.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signature artifact's..._

A signature envelope is `e = {m, v, u, s}` where `s` is signature.

This specification defines the set of signed and unsigned attributes that make up a valid Notary Project signature. This specification aims to be be agnostic of signature envelope format (e.g. COSE, JWS), details of encoding the envelope in a specific signature envelope format are covered in in separate specs.

The Notary Project signature supports the following envelope formats:

- [JWS](./signature-envelope-jws.md)
- [COSE](./signature-envelope-cose.md)

### Payload

The Notary Project signature payload is a JSON document with media type `application/vnd.cncf.notary.payload.v1+json` and has following properties.

- `targetArtifact` : Required property whose value is the descriptor of the target artifact manifest that is being signed. Only [OCI descriptor][oci-descriptor] is supported.

>   - Descriptor MUST contain `mediaType`, `digest`, `size` fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Descriptor MUST contain `mediaType`, `digest`, and `size` fields.
```

  - Descriptor MAY contain `annotations` and if present it MUST follow the [annotation rules][annotation-rules]. The Notary Project signature uses annotations for storing both Notary Project specific and user defined metadata. The prefix `io.cncf.notary` in annotation keys is reserved for use in Notary Project signature and MUST NOT be used outside this specification.

>   - Descriptor MAY contain `artifactType` field for the `config.mediaType` of OCI image manifests.

Author: This description was not added for OCI image spec v1.0.0-rc4. It was in the original version, that is, `artifactType` field MAY be used in `Descriptor` from specification point of view. From the implementation points of view, we don't use it this way today.

>   - Descriptor MAY contain `artifactType` field for the `config.mediaType` of OCI image based manifests.

Reviewer 3: What are "OCI image based manifests"?

#### Examples

```jsonc
{
  "targetArtifact": {
    "mediaType": "sbom/example",
    "digest": "sha256:9834876dcfb05cb167a5c24953eba58c4ac89b1adf57f28f2f9d09af107ee8f0",
    "size": 32654
  }
}
```

```jsonc
{
  "targetArtifact": {
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
    "digest": "sha256:73c803930ea3ba1e54bc25c2bdc53edd0284c62ed651fe7b00369da519a3c333",
    "size": 16724,

>     "artifactType": "application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature",

Author: There are two examples in this spec. One of them contains `artifactType` in the descriptor if implementations choose to use `artifactType` in descriptor. It is an optional field for `Descriptor`.

>     "artifactType": "application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature",

Author: corrected the value per the description "Descriptor MAY contain `artifactType` field for the `config.mediaType` of OCI image manifests."

A signature envelope is `e = {m, v, u, s}` where `s` is signature.

> This specification defines the set of signed and unsigned attributes that make up a valid Notary signature. This specification aims to be be agnostic of signature envelope format (e.g. COSE, JWS), details of encoding the envelope in a specific signature envelope format are covered in in separate specs.

Reviewer: Notary Project signature...

> The Notary signature supports the following envelope formats:

Reviewer: Notary Project signature...

- [JWS](./signature-envelope-jws.md)
- [COSE](./signature-envelope-cose.md)

### Payload

The Notary signature payload is a JSON document with media type `application/vnd.cncf.notary.payload.v1+json` and has following properties.

- `targetArtifact` : Required property whose value is the descriptor of the target artifact manifest that is being signed. Only [OCI descriptor][oci-descriptor] is supported.
  - Descriptor MUST contain `mediaType`, `digest`, `size` fields.

>   - Descriptor MAY contain `annotations` and if present it MUST follow the [annotation rules][annotation-rules]. The Notary signature uses annotations for storing both Notary specific and user defined metadata. The prefix `io.cncf.notary` in annotation keys is reserved for use in the Notary signature and MUST NOT be used outside this specification.

Reviewer: Notary Project signature...

> A signature envelope is `e = {m, v, u, s}` where `s` is signature.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we have explanation what are `m`, `v`, and `u`?

Author: See explanation in above text of this line

> This specification defines the set of signed and unsigned attributes that make up a valid Notary signature. This specification aims to be be agnostic of signature envelope format (e.g. COSE, JWS), details of encoding the envelope in a specific signature envelope format are covered in in separate specs.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signature_

> Notary signature supports the following envelope formats:

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signature_

- [JWS](./signature-envelope-jws.md)
- [COSE Sign1](./signature-envelope-cose.md)

### Payload

> Notary signature payload is a JSON document with media type `application/vnd.cncf.notary.payload.v1+json` and has following properties.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signature_

- `targetArtifact` : Required property whose value is the descriptor of the target artifact manifest that is being signed. Only [OCI descriptor][oci-descriptor] is supported.
  - Descriptor MUST contain `mediaType`, `digest`, `size` fields.

>   - Descriptor MAY contain `annotations` and if present it MUST follow the [annotation rules][annotation-rules]. Notary signature uses annotations for storing both Notary specific and user defined metadata. The prefix `io.cncf.notary` in annotation keys is reserved for use in Notary and MUST NOT be used outside this specification.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project_

A signature envelope is `e = {m, v, u, s}` where `s` is signature.

This specification defines the set of signed and unsigned attributes that make up a valid Notary Project signature. This specification aims to be be agnostic of signature envelope format (e.g. COSE, JWS), details of encoding the envelope in a specific signature envelope format are covered in in separate specs.

Notary Project signature supports the following envelope formats:

- [JWS](./signature-envelope-jws.md)

> - [COSE Sign1](./signature-envelope-cose.md)

Reviewer: What is the significance of `Sign1` and why aren't we using COSE only? We should explain this to the reader.

Author: COSE_Sign1 is one COSE type defined in COSE spec. There are other COSE types. I will remove it from signature specification, since it is described in `signature-envelope-cose`.

### Payload

Notary Project signature payload is a JSON document with media type `application/vnd.cncf.notary.payload.v1+json` and has following properties.

- `targetArtifact` : Required property whose value is the descriptor of the target artifact manifest that is being signed. Only [OCI descriptor][oci-descriptor] is supported.

>   - Descriptor MUST contain `mediaType`, `digest`, `size` fields.

Reviewer: Please add _and_ before `size`

>   - Descriptor MAY contain `annotations` and if present it MUST follow the [annotation rules][annotation-rules]. Notary Project signature uses annotations for storing both Notary specific and user defined metadata. The prefix `io.cncf.notary` in annotation keys is reserved for use in Notary Project and MUST NOT be used outside this specification.

Reviewer: Isn't the Notary specific metadata required? If so, for Notary specific annotations the right word is _MUST_. Should we separate those?

Author: @toddysm This is the annotation for `Descriptor`, not the annotation that is used in signature manifest. The annotation for signature manifest is required, see line 58

>   - Descriptor MAY contain `artifactType` field for the `config.mediaType` for `oci.image` based manifests.

Reviewer 3: This field is ambiguous and does not have an example in the `Examples` section.

Author: I just removed artifact manifests from the description of this field, since artifact manifest was removed from OCI image spec. And there is no example from the original specification as well. Do you know any background about this field?

- **Authentic Signing Time** (critical): The authenticated time at which the signature was generated. This claim is REQUIRED and only valid when signing scheme is `notary.x509.signingAuthority` . More details [here](#signing-time).
- **Expiry** (critical): An OPTIONAL claim that provides a “best by use” time for the artifact, as defined by the signer. More details [here](#expiry).
- **Content Type** (critical): A REQUIRED claim that indicates the content type of the [payload](#payload). The supported value is `application/vnd.cncf.notary.payload.v1+json`. Other payload types MAY be supported in future.

#### Extended attributes

Implementations of Notary Project signature spec MAY include additional signed attributes in the signature envelope.
These attributes MAY be marked critical, i.e. the attribute MUST be understood and processed by a verifier, unknown critical attributes MUST cause signature verification to fail.
Usage of extended signed attributes which are marked critical in signature will have implications on portability of the signature, these are discussed in [Signature Portability](#signature-portability) section.

#### Extended attributes for *Notation* Plugins

> Notation is a CLI and set of libraries that offer an implementation of the Notary Project signature specification. Notation allows you to sign artifacts and attaching Notary Project signatures as well as verifying Notary Project signatures.

Reviewer: There are mix of verb tenses in the second sentence. I believe grammatically correct one is:

> Notation allows you to sign artifacts and attach Notary Project signatures as well as verify Notary Project signatures.

It is better if we use simplified language, so I would propose:
> Notation allows you to sign artifacts as well as verify artifacts using Notary Project signatures.

- Claims that MUST be processed by a verifier MUST be marked as critical. Some claims may be optional and critical, i.e. they MUST be processed by a verifier only if they are present.
- Claims which are informational and do not influence signature verification MUST NOT be marked critical.

> Notary requires the signature envelope to support the following signed attributes/claims.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project_

#### Standard attributes

> - **Signing Scheme** (critical): A REQUIRED claim that defines the [Notary Signing Scheme](./signing-scheme.md) used by the signature. This attribute dictates the rest of signature schema - the set of signed and unsigned attributes to be included in the signature. Supported values are `notary.x509` and `notary.x509.signingAuthority`.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project Signing Scheme_

- **Signing Time**: A claim that indicates the time at which the signature was generated. Though this claim is signed by the signing key, it’s considered unauthenticated as a signer can modify local time and manipulate this claim. More details [here](#signing-time). This claim is REQUIRED and only valid when signing scheme is `notary.x509` .
- **Authentic Signing Time** (critical): The authenticated time at which the signature was generated. This claim is REQUIRED and only valid when signing scheme is `notary.x509.signingAuthority` . More details [here](#signing-time).
- **Expiry** (critical): An OPTIONAL claim that provides a “best by use” time for the artifact, as defined by the signer. More details [here](#expiry).
- **Content Type** (critical): A REQUIRED claim that indicates the content type of the [payload](#payload). The supported value is `application/vnd.cncf.notary.payload.v1+json`. Other payload types MAY be supported in future.

#### Extended attributes

> Implementations of Notary signature spec MAY include additional signed attributes in the signature envelope.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signature_

These attributes MAY be marked critical, i.e. the attribute MUST be understood and processed by a verifier, unknown critical attributes MUST cause signature verification to fail.
Usage of extended signed attributes which are marked critical in signature will have implications on portability of the signature, these are discussed in [Signature Portability](#signature-portability) section.

#### Extended attributes for *Notation* Plugins

> 

Reviewer: I would add a sentence to explain what Notation is.

> Notation is a CLI and set of libraries that offer an implementation of the Notary Project signature specification. Notation allows you to sign artifacts and attaching Notary Project signatures as well as verifying Notary Project signatures.

This sets the context for what the following pragraphs are explaining and relates to the previous paragraphs.

Also, it will be good to set the context for the section. Something like:

> This section covers the Notation plugins specification.

> This section documents extended attributes used by Notary reference implementation *Notation* to support plugins.

Reviewer: After you have set the context above, _Notary_ is not needed here. We can just stick with _Notation_. For example:

> This section documents extended attributes used by *Notation* to support plugins.

Plugins is a *Notation* concept that allows parts of signing and verification logic to be performed by an external provider.
*Signing plugins* allow *Notation* to be extended for integration with remote keys remote key management services and signing services, where as *verification plugins* allow for customization of verification logic.
Detailed specification for plugins can be found [here](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/main/specs/plugin-extensibility.md#notation-extensibility-for-signing-and-verification).

> These extended attributes are documented in this spec, as other Notary implementations may encounter these attributes if they verify a signature that indicated it required a verification plugin for complete signature verification.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project implementations_

- Claims that MUST be processed by a verifier MUST be marked as critical. Some claims may be optional and critical, i.e. they MUST be processed by a verifier only if they are present.
- Claims which are informational and do not influence signature verification MUST NOT be marked critical.

Notary Project requires the signature envelope to support the following signed attributes/claims.

#### Standard attributes

- **Signing Scheme** (critical): A REQUIRED claim that defines the [Notary Project Signing Scheme](./signing-scheme.md) used by the signature. This attribute dictates the rest of signature schema - the set of signed and unsigned attributes to be included in the signature. Supported values are `notary.x509` and `notary.x509.signingAuthority`.
- **Signing Time**: A claim that indicates the time at which the signature was generated. Though this claim is signed by the signing key, it’s considered unauthenticated as a signer can modify local time and manipulate this claim. More details [here](#signing-time). This claim is REQUIRED and only valid when signing scheme is `notary.x509` .

> - **Authentic Signing Time** (critical): The authenticated time at which the signature was generated. This claim is REQUIRED and only valid when signing scheme is `notary.x509.signingAuthority` . More details [here](#signing-time).

Reviewer: In this context it is not clear why we need two. We should add additional information for the **Authentic Signing Time** and how it differs from the **Signing Time**.  I understand that this is clarified in the linked section but the previous bullet has additional context making it clearer.

Author: Both `Authentic Signing Time` and `Signing Time` are explained in detail in linked section of `Signing Time`. I added additional text for `Authentic Signing Time`

- **Expiry** (critical): An OPTIONAL claim that provides a “best by use” time for the artifact, as defined by the signer. More details [here](#expiry).
- **Content Type** (critical): A REQUIRED claim that indicates the content type of the [payload](#payload). The supported value is `application/vnd.cncf.notary.payload.v1+json`. Other payload types MAY be supported in future.

#### Extended attributes

> Implementations of Notary Project signature spec MAY include additional signed attributes in the signature envelope.

Reviewer: Unfortunately, _MAY_ and _critical_ sound mutually exclusive. If they are _critical_ why aren't they _MUST_?

Author: @toddysm the term `critical` is explained in from line 134 to line 135. Here is the copy:

```
- Specific claims can be either required or optional.
- Claims that MUST be processed by a verifier MUST be marked as critical. Some claims may be optional and critical, i.e. they MUST be processed by a verifier only if they are present.
- Claims which are informational and do not influence signature verification MUST NOT be marked critical.
```

These attributes MAY be marked critical, i.e. the attribute MUST be understood and processed by a verifier, unknown critical attributes MUST cause signature verification to fail.
Usage of extended signed attributes which are marked critical in signature will have implications on portability of the signature, these are discussed in [Signature Portability](#signature-portability) section.

#### Extended attributes for *Notation* Plugins

> Notation is a CLI and set of libraries that offer an implementation of the Notary Project signature specification. Notation allows you to sign artifacts as well as verify artifacts using Notary Project signatures.

Reviewer 3: Notation is just a CLI and _has_ a set of libraries.

> Notation is a CLI and set of libraries that offer an implementation of the Notary Project signature specification. Notation allows you to sign artifacts as well as verify artifacts using Notary Project signatures.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Notation is a CLI and has a set of libraries that offer an implementation of the Notary Project signature specification. Notation allows you to sign artifacts as well as verify artifacts against Notary Project signatures.
```

> Notation is a CLI and has set of libraries that offer an implementation of the Notary signature specification. Notation allows you to sign artifacts as well as verify artifacts against the Notary signatures.

Reviewer 2: This is referring to the Notary Project signature specification correct? not [Notary](https://github.com/notaryproject/notary)? Would it be simpler to title or refer to the Notary Project signature specification as Notation? Since the capabilities to implementation are all also called Notation?

Author: Notation is just one of the implementations of Notary signature specification. There could be other implementations that follow the Notary signature specification and produce the Notary signatures.

Reviewer: Notary Project signature...

> Notation is a CLI and has set of libraries that offer an implementation of the Notary Project signature specification. Notation allows you to sign artifacts as well as verify artifacts against the Notary Project signatures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Notation](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation) is a CLI and has set of libraries that offer an implementation of the Notary Project signature specification. Notation allows you to sign artifacts as well as verify artifacts against the Notary Project signatures.
```

This section documents extended attributes used by Notation to support plugins.
Plugins is a *Notation* concept that allows parts of signing and verification logic to be performed by an external provider.

> *Signing plugins* allow *Notation* to be extended for integration with remote keys remote key management services and signing services, where as *verification plugins* allow for customization of verification logic.

Reviewer: There is repetition:
> integration with remote keys remote key management

The use of _remote_ twice makes this unreadable and it seem the sentence is not properly structured.

> *Signing plugins* allow *Notation* to be extended for integration with remote keys remote key management services and signing services, where as *verification plugins* allow for customization of verification logic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Signing plugins* allow *Notation* to be extended for integration with remote keys, remote key management services, and signing services, where as *verification plugins* allow for customization of verification logic.
```

Detailed specification for plugins can be found [here](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/main/specs/plugin-extensibility.md#notation-extensibility-for-signing-and-verification).

> These extended attributes are documented in this spec, as other Notary Project signature implementations may encounter these attributes if they verify a signature that indicated it required a verification plugin for complete signature verification.

Reviewer: This sentence is very hard to read. Should split and rework to make it clearer.

> - **Verification Plugin** (critical): An OPTIONAL attribute that specifies the name of the verification plugin that MAY be used to verify the signature e.g. “com.example.nv2plugin”.

Reviewer: Again, _OPTIONAL_ and _critical_ sound mutually exclusive. If it is _critical_ to have the attribute why is it _OPTIONAL_? Also, we are not naming plugins with dot notation.

Reviewer: Notary Project signature...

Author: @toddysm the term `critical` is explained in from line 134 to line 135. Here is the copy:

```
- Specific claims can be either required or optional.
- Claims that MUST be processed by a verifier MUST be marked as critical. Some claims may be optional and critical, i.e. they MUST be processed by a verifier only if they are present.
- Claims which are informational and do not influence signature verification MUST NOT be marked critical.
```

> [Notation plugin](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/main/specs/plugin-extensibility.md#plugin-contract) aware implementations use this attribute to load and execute a *Notation* compliant plugin.

Reviewer: Why the name of the attribute is **Verification Plugin** but here we say that its purpose is to load a compliant plugin? This is confusing. Also, Who are the _implementors_ in this case - I believe Notation is loading the plugin and not the other way around. The sentence sounds like the plugin implementors use this attribute to load the plugin that doesn't make sense.

Author: The implementations as described in the sentence, is `notation plugin aware implementations`, not `plugin implementors`, which could be Notation (current written in go language) or other implementations which are aware [plugin contract](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/main/specs/plugin-extensibility.md#plugin-contract), for example, another Notation CLI written in C# or implementations of Notary Project specification that follow the [plugin contract](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/main/specs/plugin-extensibility.md#plugin-contract)

The plugin participates in the overall signature verification workflow and performs specific steps in it.
- **Verification Plugin Minimum Version** (critical): An OPTIONAL attribute that specifies the minimum version of the verification plugin that MUST be used to verify the signature.
A Notation plugin aware implementations MUST use this attribute to verify the signature with a plugin with matching or higher plugin version.
The plugin MUST use [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/) (SemVer) to use this feature i.e the `get-plugin-metadata` plugin command MUST return a SemVer compliant version in the response.
A use case for this feature is for a plugin publisher to address security bug in older plugin version, by setting the minimum version to the plugin version with fixes.

See [Guidelines for implementations of the Notary Project signature specification](#guidelines-for-notary-project-signature-implementors) for options to handle these attributes during signature verification.

### Unsigned Attributes

> These attributes are considered unsigned with respect to the signing key that generates the signature.

Reviewer 6: @yizha1 , is there a reason we removed this line 

`These attributes are typically signed by a third party (e.g. CA, TSA).`

Author: @gokarnm I cannot recall the reason to remove this line. It seems this line should not be deleted. I created an issue #274 for tracking it and will create a PR to address it after specification v1 release.

#### Extended attributes

> Implementations of the Notary signature spec MAY include additional signed attributes in the signature envelope.

Reviewer: Notary Project signature...

The plugin MUST use [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/) (SemVer) to use this feature i.e the `get-plugin-metadata` plugin command MUST return a SemVer compliant version in the response.
A use case for this feature is for a plugin publisher to address security bug in older plugin version, by setting the minimum version to the plugin version with fixes.

> See [Guidelines for Notary Implementors](#guidelines-for-notary-implementors) for options to handle these attributes during signature verification.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project Signature Implementors_

The plugin MUST use [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/) (SemVer) to use this feature i.e the `get-plugin-metadata` plugin command MUST return a SemVer compliant version in the response.
A use case for this feature is for a plugin publisher to address security bug in older plugin version, by setting the minimum version to the plugin version with fixes.

See [Guidelines for Notary Project Signature Implementors](#guidelines-for-notary-project-signature-implementors) for options to handle these attributes during signature verification.

### Unsigned Attributes

> These attributes are considered unsigned with respect to the signing key that generates the signature. These attributes are typically signed by a third party (e.g. CA, TSA).

Reviewer: What exactly do we mean by this?
> These attributes are typically signed by a third party (e.g. CA, TSA).

First, if they are _signed_ by CA, TSA etc. they are still _signed_ but in different way. If they are _unsigned_ then they can be changed (assumption). We need more clarification on this.

Author: @toddysm the unsigned attributes mean the attributes are not signed by **the signing key that generates the signature**. The wording `signed` in this sentence `These attributes are typically signed by a third party (e.g. CA, TSA).` referred to the content of the attributes, for example if the content is a certificate, then the certificate itself was signed and issued by a CA.

I would remove this sentence to avoid confusion.

> - **Certificate Chain**: This is a REQUIRED attribute that contains the ordered list of X.509 public certificates associated with the signing key used to generate the signature. The ordered list starts with the signing certificates, any intermediate certificates and ends with the root certificate. The certificate chain MUST be authenticated against a trust store as part of signature validation. Specific requirements for the certificates in the chain are provided [here](#certificate-requirements).

Reviewer: > signing certificates
Is it one or many certificates that are used for signing. 
It is not clear what exactly the attribute contains. Is it the whole certificates? Is it the thumbprints only?

Author: The signing certificates should be changed to `signing certificate`, which is singular. 

This attribute contains the whole certificates.

- **Timestamp signature** : An OPTIONAL counter signature which provides [authentic timestamp](#signing-time)e.g. Time Stamp Authority (TSA) generated timestamp signature. Only [RFC3161][ietf-rfc3161] compliant TimeStampToken are currently supported.

> - **Signing Agent**: An OPTIONAL claim that provides the identifier of the software (e.g. Notation) that produced the signature on behalf of the user. It is an opaque string set by the software that produces the signature. It's intended primarily for diagnostic and troubleshooting purposes, this attribute is unsigned, the verifier MUST NOT validate formatting, or fail validation based on the content of this claim. The suggested format is one or more tokens of the form `{id}/{version}` containing identifier and version of the software, seperated by spaces. E.g. “notation/1.0.0”, “notation/1.0.0 com.example.nv2plugin/0.8”.

Reviewer: We do not use dot notation for the plugins.

Author: Sorry. What do you mean dot notation for the plugins?

Reviewer: The example uses _com.example.nv2plugin/0.8_ as example name for the plugin - i.e. dots in the name.

The plugin MUST use [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/) (SemVer) to use this feature i.e the `get-plugin-metadata` plugin command MUST return a SemVer compliant version in the response.
A use case for this feature is for a plugin publisher to address security bug in older plugin version, by setting the minimum version to the plugin version with fixes.

> See [Guidelines for implementations of the Notary signature specification](#guidelines-for-notary-project-signature-implementors) for options to handle these attributes during signature verification.

Reviewer 2: I would strongly recommend changing any reference of "the Notary signature specification" to "Notary Project signature specification" or Notation as this area introduces it as Notary Project, not as Notary according to the linked title of this guideline.

Author: Thanks @TheFoxAtWork 

@toddysm do you have any comment on the suggestion?

Reviewer: We should use "Notary Project signature" as we discussed in https://github.com/notaryproject/.github/issues/35

    - The certificate MUST NOT chain to multiple parents/roots.
    - The certificate chain MUST NOT contain a certificate that is unrelated to the certificate chain.
1. Any certificate in the certificate chain MUST NOT use SHA1WithRSA and ECDSAWithSHA1 signatures.
1. Only Basic Constraints, Key Usage, and Extended Key Usage extensions of X.509 certificates are honored. For rest of the extensions, implementations of the Notary signature specification MUST fail open i.e. rest of the extensions MUST NOT be evaluated or honored.

> 1. The certificates in the certificate chain MUST be valid at signing time. Implementations of the Notary signature specification MUST NOT enforce validity period nesting, i.e the validity period for a given certificate may not fall entirely within the validity period of that certificate's issuer certificate.

Reviewer: "Notary Project signature"

    - The certificate MUST NOT chain to multiple parents/roots.
    - The certificate chain MUST NOT contain a certificate that is unrelated to the certificate chain.
1. Any certificate in the certificate chain MUST NOT use SHA1WithRSA and ECDSAWithSHA1 signatures.

> 1. Only Basic Constraints, Key Usage, and Extended Key Usage extensions of X.509 certificates are honored. For rest of the extensions, Notary Project signature implementors MUST fail open i.e. they MUST NOT be evaluated or honored.

Reviewer: This sentence is grammatically incorrect. Can we fix? _"fail open"_ should be _"fail to open"_ and we need to clarify _to open_ what exactly?
> For rest of the extensions, Notary Project signature implementors MUST fail open i.e. they MUST NOT be evaluated or honored.

Author: Updated the wording to `fail to open`. @priteshbandi could you share more info about "fail to open what" since you are the original author. Thanks.

Reviewer 5: Its correct, we don't care about other extensions present in cert even if they are marked critical thus implementation must not fail for those extensions. 

```A system set to fail open does not shut down when failure conditions are present```

Author: @toddysm "Fail open" seems a term as explained by @priteshbandi. See reference https://community.microfocus.com/cyberres/b/sws-22/posts/security-fundamentals-part-1-fail-open-vs-fail-closed.

> 1. The certificates in the certificate chain MUST be valid at signing time. Notary Project signature implementors MUST NOT enforce validity period nesting, i.e the validity period for a given certificate may not fall entirely within the validity period of that certificate's issuer certificate.

Reviewer: I am not sure that I understand that. 
> the validity period for a given certificate may not fall entirely within the validity period of that certificate's issuer certificate

Aren't most certificates within the validity period of the issuer's certificate. CAs have validity of 10, 20 years while signing certificates maybe valid for 2, 1 years, months, or days.

Author: Yes, in most cases, it is, but notation doesn't enforce the check. For example, if a CA has validity between the year 2000 and 2005. in the year 2004, CA signed certificates with validity from the year 2004 to 2006.

1. In the absence of an Authentic Timestamp, each and every certificate in the certificate chain i.e. signing certificate, intermediate certificates, and the root certificate must be valid i.e. not expired at the time of signature verification.

## FAQ

**Q: How will the Notary Project signature specification support multiple signature envelope formats?**

> **A:** The `mediaType` of image manifest's layer identifies the signature envelope type.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**A:** The `mediaType` of artifact manifest's layer identifies the signature envelope type.  
```
I believe other discussions confirmed 'artifact' to be the most appropriate term over 'image' as 'image' is more narrowly scoped in applicability than what the Notary Project signature specification may be used for.

Author: @TheFoxAtWork The context is different. The image manifest refers to https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/manifest.md, which is type of manifest that is used for storing signatures, so it is a correct term.

## FAQ

> **Q: How will Notary support multiple signature envelope formats?**

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project_

**A:** The `mediaType` of artifact manifest's blob identifies the signature envelope type.  
The client implementation can use the aforementioned `mediaType` to parse the signature envelope.

> **Q: How will Notary support multiple payload formats?**

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project_

### Expiry

> This is an optional feature that provides a “best by use” time for the artifact, as defined by the signer. Notary allows users to include an optional expiry time when they generate a signature. The expiry time is not set by default and requires explicit configuration by users at the time of signature generation. The artifact is considered expired when the current time is greater than or equal to expiry time, users performing verification can either configure their trust policies to fail the verification or even accept the artifact with expiry date in the past using policy. This is an advanced feature that allows implementing controls for user defined semantics like deprecation for older artifacts, or block older artifacts in a production environment. Users should only include an expiry time in the signed artifact after considering the behavior they expect for consumers of the artifact after it expires. Users can choose to consume an artifact even after the expiry time based on their specific needs.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signature specification allows users to include..._

### Expiry

> This is an optional feature that provides a "best by use" time for the artifact, as defined by the signer. The Notary signature specification allows users to include an optional expiry time when they generate a signature. The expiry time is not set by default and requires explicit configuration by users at the time of signature generation. The artifact is considered expired when the current time is greater than or equal to expiry time, users performing verification can either configure their trust policies to fail the verification or even accept the artifact with expiry date in the past using policy. This is an advanced feature that allows implementing controls for user defined semantics like deprecation for older artifacts, or block older artifacts in a production environment. Users should only include an expiry time in the signed artifact after considering the behavior they expect for consumers of the artifact after it expires. Users can choose to consume an artifact even after the expiry time based on their specific needs.

Reviewer: "Notary Project signature"

### Expiry

> This is an optional feature that provides a “best by use” time for the artifact, as defined by the signer. Notary Project signature specification allows users to include an optional expiry time when they generate a signature. The expiry time is not set by default and requires explicit configuration by users at the time of signature generation. The artifact is considered expired when the current time is greater than or equal to expiry time, users performing verification can either configure their trust policies to fail the verification or even accept the artifact with expiry date in the past using policy. This is an advanced feature that allows implementing controls for user defined semantics like deprecation for older artifacts, or block older artifacts in a production environment. Users should only include an expiry time in the signed artifact after considering the behavior they expect for consumers of the artifact after it expires. Users can choose to consume an artifact even after the expiry time based on their specific needs.

Reviewer 3: Changing `“best by use”` to `"best by use"`
```suggestion
This is an optional feature that provides a "best by use" time for the artifact, as defined by the signer. Notary Project signature specification allows users to include an optional expiry time when they generate a signature. The expiry time is not set by default and requires explicit configuration by users at the time of signature generation. The artifact is considered expired when the current time is greater than or equal to expiry time, users performing verification can either configure their trust policies to fail the verification or even accept the artifact with expiry date in the past using policy. This is an advanced feature that allows implementing controls for user defined semantics like deprecation for older artifacts, or block older artifacts in a production environment. Users should only include an expiry time in the signed artifact after considering the behavior they expect for consumers of the artifact after it expires. Users can choose to consume an artifact even after the expiry time based on their specific needs.
```

E.g. Images for containerized applications and services used within an organization, or shared with limited authorized parties.
Based on user requirements a private artifact can have different levels of portability, the signature’s portability should at least match the the artifact’s portability.

> *Notary signature portability* is based on the following

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signature_

#### Signature discovery

> Notary addressed signature discovery by storing signatures in the same registry (location) where an artifact is present.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signature specification addresses..._

This is supported through [OCI Distribution Referrers API][oci-distribution-referrers] which allows reference artifacts such as signatures, SBOMs to be associated with existing artifacts like Images.

> Notary allows multiple signatures to be associated with an artifact, and clients may automatically push signatures for an artifact to a destination registry when a signed artifact moves from one registry to other.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signature specification allows multiple..._

#### Verification requirements

Notary supports a range of signed artifacts intended for public and private distribution.

> Signatures generated by Notary without extended signature attributes marked critical can be verified in any environment where Notation client or another Notary standards compliant verification tool is available, without any additional dependencies.

Reviewer: I would change to _Signatures generated without extended..._ and _where Notation client or another Notary Project standards compliant verification tool is available..._

It should be noted that revocations checks, which usually relies on an external mechanism such as CRL/OCSP may require the verification environment to have access to local network or public internet, to have access to the CRL/OCSP endpoint.

> Notary also supports signatures generated using compliant signing plugins, which allow vendors to optionally provide additional features on top of Notary standard features.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signature specification also supports..._ and _optionally provide additional features on top of Notation standard features_

> Verification of these signatures may require additional dependencies like Notary compliant verification plugin, making these signatures more appropriate to use where broad portability may not be required for the associated signed artifact.

Reviewer: I would change to _additional dependencies like Notation compliant verification plugin..._

This allows users to implement security controls required for their organizations, that are not broadly applicable and may take time to standardize.
E.g. Integration with a signature transparency log as part of signature verification.

Based on user’s requirements, a user can select appropriate signing mechanism that produces signatures with desired portability.

> Notary signatures without any critical extended attributes do not impose any additional dependency requirements for verifiers as these can be validated with just the Notation client.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signatures..._

> Whereas, Notary signatures that contain critical extended attributes will require additional dependencies for signature validation, either on Notary compliant plugins or equivalent tooling which may not be available in all environments.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notary Project signatures..._ and _Notation compliant plugin..._

> Similarly, Notary compliant plugin vendors should be aware that usage of extended signed attributes which are marked critical in signature will have implications on portability of the signature.

Reviewer: I would change to _Notation compliant..._

### Guidelines for Notary Implementors

> Implementations of Notary, can choose to be [Notation plugin protocol](./plugin-extensibility.md#plugin-contract) aware or not. If an implementation chooses to be plugin protocol aware, and it encounters the Verification Plugin and Verification Plugin minimum version attributes during signature verification, it MUST process these attributes. This involves finding the appropriate plugin and the version to use, and executing `verify-signature` plugin command with correct inputs and processing the plugin response, as per the [Verification Plugin interface](./plugin-extensibility.md#verification-extensibility).

Reviewer: I am confused what are we trying to say here. Notation is the only one that has plugins. We are not specifying how to implement the tooling, just the signature. Any tool can implement it as it wants. The purpose of this paragraph is a bit confusing to me. Unless we are talking about the Notation plugins I am not sure it makes sense.

Author: IMO, it is due to there are extended attributes defined by signature spec for the support of notation plugins, however, other notary project signature implementor can decide whether to implement plugin protocol or not.

> Alternatively, an implementation of Notary can choose not to implement plugin protocol.

Reviewer: Same comment as above. Notary Project should be concentrated on specifying the signature and its portability but not how the tooling must be implemented and whether it should have plugins or not. Not sure about the intent here.

Author: IMO, it is due to there are extended attributes defined by signature spec for the support of plugins, however, other notary project signature implementor can decide whether to implement plugin protocol or not

E.g. Images for containerized applications and services used within an organization, or shared with limited authorized parties.
Based on user requirements a private artifact can have different levels of portability, the signature’s portability should at least match the the artifact’s portability.

*The Notary signature portability* is based on the following

#### Signature discovery

> The Notary signature specification addressed signature discovery by storing signatures in the same registry (location) where an artifact is present.

Reviewer: "Notary Project signature"

This is supported through [OCI Distribution Referrers API][oci-distribution-referrers] which allows reference artifacts such as signatures, SBOMs to be associated with existing artifacts like Images.

> The Notary signature specification allows multiple signatures to be associated with an artifact, and clients may automatically push signatures for an artifact to a destination registry when a signed artifact moves from one registry to other.

Reviewer: "Notary Project signature"

#### Verification requirements

> The Notary signature specification supports a range of signed artifacts intended for public and private distribution.

Reviewer: "Notary Project signature"

Signatures generated without extended signature attributes marked critical can be verified in any environment where Notation client or another Notary Project specification compliant verification tool is available, without any additional dependencies.
It should be noted that revocations checks, which usually relies on an external mechanism such as CRL/OCSP may require the verification environment to have access to local network or public internet, to have access to the CRL/OCSP endpoint.

> The Notary signature specification also supports signatures generated using compliant signing plugins, which allow vendors to optionally provide additional features on top of Notation standard features.

Reviewer: "Notary Project signature"

The Notary signature specification also supports signatures generated using compliant signing plugins, which allow vendors to optionally provide additional features on top of Notation standard features.
Verification of these signatures may require additional dependencies like Notation compliant verification plugin, making these signatures more appropriate to use where broad portability may not be required for the associated signed artifact.
This allows users to implement security controls required for their organizations, that are not broadly applicable and may take time to standardize.
E.g. Integration with a signature transparency log as part of signature verification.

Based on user’s requirements, a user can select appropriate signing mechanism that produces signatures with desired portability.
The Notary Project signatures without any critical extended attributes do not impose any additional dependency requirements for verifiers as these can be validated with just the Notation client.

> Whereas, the Notary Project signatures that contain critical extended attributes will require additional dependencies for signature validation, either on Notation compliant plugins or equivalent tooling which may not be available in all environments.

Reviewer: "Notary Project signature"

> Implementations of the Notary signature specification, can choose to be [Notation plugin protocol](./plugin-extensibility.md#plugin-contract) aware or not. If an implementation chooses to be plugin protocol aware, and it encounters the Verification Plugin and Verification Plugin minimum version attributes during signature verification, it MUST process these attributes. This involves finding the appropriate plugin and the version to use, and executing `verify-signature` plugin command with correct inputs and processing the plugin response, as per the [Verification Plugin interface](./plugin-extensibility.md#verification-extensibility).

Reviewer: "Notary Project signature"

> Alternatively, an implementation of the Notary signature specification can choose not to implement plugin protocol.

Reviewer: "Notary Project signature"
